GNU Astronomy Utilities NEWS                          -*- outline -*-

* Noteworthy changes in release 0.1 (2016-05-30) [stable]

** Bug fixes

  MakeCatalog's problem in checking the sizes of all input images is now
  fixed.

  NoiseChisel's problem with reading the `--kernel' option is now
  corrected (bug #46750).

  lib/mesh.c's problem in correctly calculating the mesh sizes was
  corrected (bug #47611).

  `make check' will not look into system utility configuration files. In
  the previous release, if Gnuastro was already installed, the
  configuration files already present on the system would also be read. Now
  only configuration files in the tested package are used (bug #47833).

  Ghostscript's version is now checked at configure time after its
  existence. ConvertType uses the `-dPDFFitPage' option to Ghostscript
  which was introduced in version 9.10, so older versions would pass
  configure but at `make check' time, the PDF test would fail. Now this
  test is skipped (bug #47868).

  Most tests would fail when `make check -jN' was run (to do the checks on
  N threads). A dependency structure has now been defined to fix this
  problem and greatly speed up the testing process (bug #47957).

** New utilities

  Arithmetic: For arithmetic operations on the pixels of input images. With
  this utility, it is now possible to add multiple images with each other,
  or easily calculate a median image. It as a large set of other arithmetic
  operations and some functions which can be done on the input image(s). An
  unlimited number of input images can be given, the images will only be
  loaded when necessary and will be freed as soon as they are no longer
  necessary.

  CosmicCalculator: For doing cosmological calculations at a given
  redshift.

** New features

  All the utilities that would produce a log file now have a `--nolog'
  option to avoid printing a log file.

  The tiled image compression convention (.fits.fz, created with `fpack')
  files can now be used as input in the utilities.

  ImageCrop can now also crop a polygon from the input image. The polygon
  vertices can be given in the world or image coordinates. The simple
  `--polygon' option will keep the insides of the polygon while the
  `--outpolygon' will keep the outside of the polygon.

  ImageCrop and ImageWarp can now read the WCS information of a FITS header
  from a specific region with the `--hstartwcs' and `--hendwcs'. In some
  older FITS images, when the WCS distortions were not as standardized as
  now, there were cases which would confuse WCSLIB.

  NoiseChisel can now save the grown clumps image instead of the original
  clumps image in the output with the `--grownclumps' option.

  Convolve can now do deconvolution with the `--makekernel' option.

  MakeProfiles now has a `--setconsttonan' option which will fill the
  contant profiles with a NaN (blank) value, not a number, allowing the
  creations of elliptical masked regions for example.

  Header can now import a keyword directly from a string with the `--asis'
  option.

  MakeCatalog can now output the geometric (average position independent of
  pixel flux value) positions of the objects too.

  MakeCatalog can now produce the object's elliptical parameters (for
  example semi-major axis, semi-minor axis, and position angle). This can
  also be done both in standard flux weighted and geometric methods too.

  MakeCatalog now has a `--threshold' function to only use pixels above a
  given threshold in each object or clump. This is useful to avoid diffuse
  regions in calculations.

  MakeCatalog now has a `--noriverbrightness' option. With this option it
  is possible to calculate the clump flux without subtracting the river
  pixels on its circumference.

  The number of CPU threads is no longer a configuration option, it is now
  determined at runtime for each program. Therefore it is now easily
  possible to built Gnuastro on one system to use on another (commonly done
  in the GNU/Linux package managers). Therefore ./configure no longer has a
  `--with-numthreads' option.

  Every commit in Gnuastro's history (after implementing this feature) can
  now be given a unique version number. Since the version number is printed
  in possible outputs, this feature can help reproducibility, even when the
  an official/stable release isn't used.

  The AUTHORS file is now automatically generated from the version
  controlled history. Also all the authors that have contributed to
  Gnuastro are included in the second (copyright) page of the PDF book.

  All the bootstrapped directories are now moved with a new `bootstrapped'
  directory in the top source directory. This significantly cleans up this
  directory, allowing users to more easily find the hand-written Gnuastro
  source files they like.

  A `bug-gnuastro' Info page was created so users can easily go to that
  page for information on how to submit bug reports. It is accessible on
  the command line with the command `info bug-gnuastro'.

** Changes in behavior

  The separate utilities no longer have a separate version number. With the
  introduction of unofficial version numbers generated from each commit in
  Gnuastro's history, the utility version numbers would cause confusion.

  MakeProfiles will now add a suffix to the individual images and put them
  in the output directory if specified.

  NoiseChisel and MakeCatalog now use the median mesh standard deviation to
  define the over-all depth of the image. Previously they used the maximum
  value (or the least depth).

  NoiseChisel no longer outputs a sky subtracted image. This job can now be
  done with the new Arithmetic utility.

  NoiseChisel's `--segsnhistnbins' option was renamed to
  `--clumpsnhistnbins'.

** Improvements

  NoiseChisel's default quantiles were changed to 0.95 from 0.99. Since the
  old value was too severe.

  NoiseChisel's S/N thresholds are now found from the distribution of
  pseudo-detections and clumps from the full image, not within each large
  mesh. This was done to increase the accuracy of the S/N threshold. There
  were commonly not enough points in large mesh sizes and this would add
  scatter. With ImageCrop's polygon capabilities, it is now easily possible
  to cut out the region that has uniform noise properties (depth and
  correlated noise). Therefore the old `--checkdetectionsn' and
  `checkclumpsn' options are no longer present.

  When building from the version controlled source, the whole bootstrapping
  process is done with one script. In the previous version, all the
  separate operations should have been done by hand (as instructed in the
  old manual).

  All the build steps now report what was done and suggest the next
  step. This feature can be disabled with the `--disable-guide-message' at
  configure time.
